So what is CSS?
CSS stands for cascading style sheets.
So while HTML allows us to write our
content for the web, where we can add
headings, and paragraphs, and images,
it's not gonna have a beautiful style.
So you might see some default styling
when you load a plain HTML document, and
we'll see that with our project.
And that's because the browser that
you're using provides default styling for
some HTML elements.
But we use CSS to style
these web pages and
make them visually appealing,
but also accessible to our users.
So CSS1 was first proposed in 1994.
And at the time, browsers gave a lot
of styling power to the user and
not a lot of it was
available to the authors.
So all the webpage authors could do is
kind of mark a piece of content as, hey,
this is a paragraph, or this is a heading.
And that was about it.
So the goal of CSS was to provide
a declarative styling language that was
flexible for website authors, and
it kinda shared the styling
power between authors and users.
And by means of this cascade, the styles
could be combined and prioritized, so
the authors and readers,
again, both had a say.
So by late 1996, CSS1 was finished.
So while the CSS Working Group
proceeded with CSS2,
a lot of the web browsers
struggled to implement CSS1.
Each piece of CSS was pretty
simple on its own, but
the combination of all of these pieces
is what created some complex behavior.
So the CSS Working Group
finalized CSS2 in early 1998.
And once CSS2 was finalized,
work immediately began on CSS3.
But it was a little bit different, because
instead of one big package essentially,
it was constructed as a series
of standalone modules.
So the rationale behind this was that each
module could be worked on at its own pace,
and really critical or popular modules
could be advanced along the W3C or
the World Wide Web Consortium,
their progress track,
instead of being held up by other modules.
So by early 2012,
there were three CSS3 modules that have
reached full recommendation status.
So those were color level three,
namespaces, and selectors level three.
So when a browser displays a document,
it has to combine the content
with the style information.
So, first,
the browser is gonna load the HTML.
Next, it's gonna convert the HTML to
the DOM, or the Document Object Model, and
this is a representation of the objects
that really make up the structure and
the content of the document.
Third, the browser fetches
the linked resources.
So these are gonna be things like images,
videos, and CSS.
JavaScript's handled a little
bit later on in the process, so
it's not included in Step 3.
Step 4 is the browser
parses this FetchCSS, and
it's gonna determine which style rules
should be applied to which nodes in
the DOM, and
it's gonna associate styles to them.
So this is called the render tree.
And Step 5, the render tree is
laid out in the structure, and
it should appear after all
the style rules have been applied.
And then lastly, the visual display
of the page is shown on the screen.
I believe this is called
first contentful pin.
So let's talk about some of
the terminology that you might hear.
So elements are the basis
of document structure.
And CSS depends on elements,
and they can take two forms,
they can be replaced elements and
non-replaced elements.
So replaced elements are elements where
the content is going to be replaced by
something that's not directly
represented in the content.
So, for example, this might be an image.
This element that we see here,
it presents nothing unless you
point it to some external content.
So if you point it to a valid image file,
that's gonna be placed in the document and
replace this.
But if not,
it's either gonna display nothing,
or the browser might display
a broken image placeholder.
Non-replaced elements, they comprise, or
are comprised by the majority
of HTML elements.
So it means that their content
is presented by the user agent,
which is generally a browser, inside of
a box that's generated by the element.
So this might be like a heading
level one that says hello.
So in addition to replaced and
non-replaced elements,
you may have heard of block and
inline elements.
There are more display types, but these
are kinda the most foundational ones.
So block elements, they generate
an element box that fills the parent
element's content area, and they don't
have other elements beside them.
So what does that look like?
So here we've got a heading level one,
followed by a paragraph.
And both of these are block elements.
And if it were to be rendered,
we can see that hello is on Line 1.
And this is a paragraph with really
important information is rendered
on Line 2.
Inline elements generate an element
box within a line of text and
they don't break up the flow of that line.
So what would this look like in practice?
So we can see within our paragraph
element we have a link, and
it says,
this is a link to a really cool website.
And we can see that link is being rendered
inline with the paragraph element.
So there are some nuances to block and
inline elements, and
we'll talk about those a little bit later.
But those are gonna be two of
the foundational types of elements that we
will be working with.
So CSS is a rule-based language.
We define these rules by creating
different styles that should be applied to
a certain element or a group of elements.
So, for example, if we want to select
all heading level ones on our page,
we can do that with the following code.
So we select all h1 headers
with the h1 element selector.
So the selector is followed by
a set of curly brackets, and
inside these curly brackets,
we're gonna write our style rules.
So we call these declarations.
So a declaration is a pair that contains a
property, in this case color, and a value,
in this case red.
If we break down this into
the terminology, right,
we've got the selector, which is h1,
and the declaration block,
again, is the curly brackets.
The declaration is that color red,
that key-value property pair.
And again, color is a type of property,
and red is the value for that property.